---
layout: post
title: "How I Write Tests"
date: 2016-10-12 16:24:28 +0000
comments: true
categories:
---

The longer I spend as a software engineer, the more obsessive I get
about testing. I fully subscribe to the definition of legacy code as
"code without an automated test suite." I'm convinced that the best
thing you can do to encourage fast progress in a test suite is to
[design for testing][design-for-testing] and have a fast, reliable,
comprehensive test suite.

But for all that, I've never really subscribed to any of the
test-driven-development manifestos or practices that I've
encountered. I don't believe in religiously writing tests before code,
or swear by any particular structure for tests.

I do try to write a lot of tests, these days, though, and I do try to
write my code with tests in mind. And I've come to realize that my
approach could be thought of as a test-driven-development
philosophy. Here's how I think about code and testing, especially in
green-field systems or components.

## Work module-at-a-time

(My [previous post][design-for-testing] covers a lot of how I think
about this)

As I explore how to structure a new project, I think about how to
structure it into separable components, guided by the question of "How
can I design units that are testable with as few dependencies as
possible?"

As I work on each module, I try to write tests for the code in that
module before I move on.

I rarely write the tests before the code. Except for the simplest
cases, I often don't know the details of the implementation and
interfaces I'm writing until I've started working on them and
experimented with a few approaches. If writing the tests (which are,
themselves, clients of the interface!) helps me feel out the
interfaces, I might do so, but it's certainly not a rule.

However, I do try to write a module and its tests together, and -- as
much as possible -- complete both before moving on to another
module. This practice helps ensure that my modules are testable (and
minimally coupled with the rest of the system), as well as to ensure
ongoing test coverage.

This rule (and in fact, none of the rules I list here) isn't a hard
and fast rule for me. I cheat sometimes. But I've found this approach
to be a valuable heuristic.

## Avoid running `main`

When developing a new project, or adding a feature, there's a very
strong instinct to start with manual testing -- to run the binary and
test the new feature by hand.

I try very hard to resist this urge.

Instead, as soon as I've added a feature, if I find myself itching to
try it out by hand, I've learned to recognize that urge, pause, and
step back and write an automated test covering whatever behavior I was
about to execute by hand.

Manual testing is often quick and easy and satisfying -- you can
directly test your application, one can see the results immediately on
your screen, and one can interact with the application "for real",
instead of in the sometimes-awkward scripted/mocked mode of unit
tests. It's a very natural instinct.

However, it's also largely-wasted effort! A manual test only verifies
the current state of the code base. As soon as you make a change,
you've started to invalidate the results. If, however, you take the
effort to encode the test in code as an automated test, it continues
to be valid indefinitely into the future.

## Build tools for testing

Of course, it is often genuinely substantially easier to test your
application by hand than to write a test. Clicking is much simpler
than trying to reason about coordinates. Entering input and getting
feedback interactively is easier than encoding an entire transcript up
front by thinking hard.

If testing your application in code is hard or frustrating, it's worth
the effort to invest in your own testing tooling to make it easier!
Tests are an important part of your codebase, and you wouldn't skip
important *features* just because they were hard!

Here are some concrete techniques I've found and try to use regularly
to make writing tests easier and more productive.

### Write lots of fakes

No one seems to agree quite on the boundaries between "fakes",
"mocks", "stubs", and various other testing concepts. But I'm going to
use the term "fake" as I picked it up from
[a great PyCon talk][stop-mocking], which is a standalone
implementation of a component's interface that is reusable between
multiple tests, and that is independently testable on its own. (That's
a good talk, by the way, that very my influenced my thinking. It's
worth a watch.)

In some cases, a fake can be a near-complete in-memory implementation
of a backend. For instance, if your application depends on S3, you can
probably implement an in-memory blob store that implements your
internal S3 interface, and then re-use it everywhere in your tests. As
another concrete example, during testing, Django replaces its internal
email implementation with an [in-memory email outbox][django-email],
letting you run your code unchanged and then observe the output.

If your interface is too complex, you can still provide a
"programmable" fake that lets tests configure or plug in its behavior
in appropriate ways, instrucing it how to respond to inputs. Such a
fake still provides value by structuring testing, and sharing
lower-level, ancillary details of implementing the interface.

The "sarama" Go Kafka client implements
[such a programmable fake](https://godoc.org/github.com/Shopify/sarama#MockBroker)
Kafka Broker, allowing for testing both of the library itself, and by
consumers of the library if they wish.

Anytime you find yourself stubbing out an external in an ad-hoc basis,
it's worth stepping back and asking if you should be writing a
reusable fake. It's more effort up front, but it will decrease the
cost of writing future tests, and increase your tests'
maintainability, both vital goals.

### Design miniformats for test input and output

Often when writing tests, you want to construct either a domain object
or some input to your system with particular properties -- certain
contents, a certain bit pattern, whatever. It's very easy to find
yourself writing long sequences of code to construct objects, or
copying around opaque representations of internal data structures.


One powerful technique can be to design and implement a small textual
format for representing your data (either internal state objects, or
structured input), that is easily human readable and writable. Then,
augment your tests and application so that you can easily input or
print objects using this format. Now, when you need an object of a
specific shape, you can take this easy textual representation, edit it
to match what you need, and start your testing from there.

You can often use this format to provide a way to make manual testing
more reproducible. Construct some specific input or internal state
manually, and then configure the application to dump it in your
miniformat. Now you can easily encode that into a test and replay from
wherever you were.

My favorite example of this technique is David Benjamin's
[DER ASCII][der-ascii] project. David is half of the BoringSSL
project, and as such spends a lot of time dealing with X.509
certificates and messages, which are encoded in [ASN.1 DER][der], a
moderately gnarly binary format. He wrote DER ASCII to provide a
simple textual representation of these structured binary strings,
allowing him to represent, generate, and modify them for testing
purposes much more easily than he otherwise could.

### Design a testing minilanguage or "zoo"

Often, it's worth going one step forward and building a completely
data-driven test harness that lets you express common types of test
cases entirely as data files in a directory, without adding any
additional code. Done right, this lets you add new test cases directly
in a familiar format, and even directly translate bug reports or
interactive tests into test cases.

This technique is well-known among compiler developers (probably
because compilers have the luxury of a very clear input format: simple
text files); Take a look at a [sample gcc test case][gcc-test]. You
needn't read it in detail, but skim over it, and note some key
techniques and details:

 - This is a self-contained test case. Someone created this test by
   adding this file, which is in a format very familiar to any GCC
   developer (C source), and by doing no additional work (e.g. there's
   no secondary list of these, or configuration)
 - Note the `{dg-* …}` comments. In order to make these tests
   self-contained, and able to express many varieties of tests
   (correctness, error messages, warnings, etc), GCC developers have
   built a custom annotation/directive system (what I call a "testing
   minilanguage") to instruct the test harness how to interpret this
   test case, and what to check for.

[gcc-test]: https://github.com/gcc-mirror/gcc/blob/87d59e72dfe85065aa3fdefdd01dd538292392ea/gcc/testsuite/c-c%2B%2B-common/array-lit.c

Building a runner for these test cases is a bit of upfront investment,
but it's well worth it; By making it easier to write tests, you'll
ensure that you and other contributors write more tests, and your
future selves (and other future developers!) will thank you for the
effort.

This technique is easiest for programs with simple self-contained
textual inputs (such as compilers), but it can be adopted more
widely. At my work, I worked on an internal HTTP proxy application; We
built out a test harness so that we could ultimately paste entire HTTP
requests and the expected responses into files, and perform automated
testing by replaying and comparing those. This required stubbing out
various pieces of entropy and having a "standard" well-known initial
database state for these tests, but the end result was very easy
regression testing -- most bugs we found could be encoded as
regression tests by just copy/pasting from logs and/or `tcpdump` with
some slight modification.

## Regression tests, Regression tests, Regression tests

My final, and perhaps more important, advice is to always write
regression tests. Encode every single bug you find as a test, to
ensure that you'll notice if you ever encounter it again.

This doesn't have to just mean "bugs reported by a user" or anything
similar; Any bug you find in the course of development is worth
writing a test for. Even if you find yourself half way into typing a
line of code, realize you've made a mistake, and backspace half the
line: Pause, and ask yourself "If I had made that mistake, is there a
test I could have written to demonstrate it?"

The goal is, essentially, to ensure a ratchet on the types of possible
bugs in your system. There are probably nigh-infinitely many bugs you
could write, but the set of desired behaviors of your system is
relatively finite, and the set of bugs you're *likely* to write is
similarly limited, and if you turn every bug into a test on one of
those behaviors, you'll eventually converge on testing for most of the
important failure modes of your system.

At least, that's the optimistic take. Even if it doesn't converge,
though, there's a lot to be said for only having any specific bug
once, ever.

[design-for-testing]: /2016/03/design-for-testability/
[stop-mocking]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Xu5EhKVZdV8
[django-email]: https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/1.10/topics/testing/tools/#email-services
[der]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/X.690#DER_encoding
[der-ascii]: https://github.com/google/der-ascii
