---
layout: post
status: publish
published: true
title: Conkeror
author: nelhage
author_login: nelhage
author_email: nelhage@mit.edu
author_url: http://nelhage.com
wordpress_id: 8
wordpress_url: http://nelhage.scripts.mit.edu/madeofbugs/?p=8
date: 2008-03-13 19:57:00.000000000 +01:00
categories:
- Uncategorized
tags:
- conkeror
- js
- javascript
- emacs
- web
---
I've recently switched to [Conkeror][conkeror] as my primary
browser. It started life as a Firefox extension, but nowadays it's a
standalone app built on top of Mozilla's xulrunner, so it uses the
Gecko rendering engine.

What it is, is an emacs implemented in Javascript, for the web. This
means on the one hand that it _acts_ like emacs. Most of the basic
emacs keybindings are supported -- you open URLs with `C-x C-f`, and
have buffers you can switch between with `C-x b` and so on.

However, what is also means is that internally, it is fully an emacs,
with all the extensibility and all the other things that applies. The
UI you see is just code written on top of a generic core, that
implements the core emacs primitives, including

* The basic `buffer` datatype. But instead of being a plain text
  store, it's instead a full Gecko XUL&#47;XHTML DOM.
* A self-documenting `command` infrastructure and `variable`
  infrastructure, that lets you look up the documentation and
  definition of any command or configuration variable.
* `keymaps` accessible from javascript that map keys and
  key sequences to commands, letting you rebind any key from your
  configuration code, and define new modes with completely new
  keybinding sets

In other words, it really is not just an emacs-like frontend to
Gecko&#47;Firefox, but is a full platform on top of xulrunner for writing
interactive applications in javascript&#47;html&#47;css like emacs.

I predict it's only a matter of time before someone

* Adds the ability to edit local files and becomes a full text editor
  that can actually start to _compete_ with emacs. At that point
  people will start to port things like `emacs-vc` and all the Nice
  Things we've come to expect from emacs, and
* Writes a mailreader for it ;)

[conkeror]: http:&#47;&#47;conkeror.mozdev.org
